To design for people, you also need to understand
people.
When designing products, we spend a lot of
time on different research methods to understand
the behavior, habits, and needs of our users.
But there are some general patterns that we
see in most people.
The way people acquire, process, and store
information in their brains is what
cognitive psychology focuses on.
This branch of psychology examines a wide
variety of mental processes, including perception,
thinking, memory, attention, language,
problem-solving, and learning.
As with the other chapters, this is a vast
subject and a field in its own right.
In this lesson, I want to take you through
some principles and examples that are good
to know when working on user experiences.
Let's start with memory.
The first thing to know about memory is that
it is limited, especially short-term memory.
There is only a limited amount of information
that people can hold in their working memory
before they forget it.
For example, if you're trying to remember
a name and phone number and someone starts
talking to you at the same time, you'll likely
forget it quickly.
If you don't focus, you lose it from your
working memory.
We can prove this with a simple test.
I'll show you three letters that I want you
to remember.
Don't cheat by writing it down.
Next, I'm going to show you a number and I
want you to count backward from the number
by subtracting three from it.
For example 30, 27 ,24 and so on.
Until I tell you to stop.
Ready?
I want you to remember these letters.
Now count back by three until I tell you to
stop, starting with 637.
Do you remember the three letters?
The correct group was: KTZ.
If you did remember them, give yourself a
pat on the back.
If you didn't, take comfort in the fact that
most people don't remember it either.
This test is part of a famous experiment done
in 1959 by psychology researchers
Lloyd and Margaret Peterson.
They tested how quickly people forget information.
After six seconds, only half of the participants
remembered the letters.
After 12 seconds as in our example,
it was only 15%.
The test seemed simple, but something intervened.
Counting down to three is a classic example
of interference.
The counting behavior creates new information
in your brain.
New information overshadows information from
the past, making us less able to store and
retrieve memories.
The same thing happens online.
Interference affects the user experience.
For example, we need to remember all kinds
of information when we shop online.
Prices, sizes, scores, ratings, reward points,
availability, and many others.
Taken in isolation, each piece of information
is easy to remember.
However, we also perform multiple behaviors
when shopping online: navigating between screens,
adding to carts, creating passwords for accounts,
and entering shipping information into forms.
This makes it very difficult to remember all
the information.
If you want to optimize user experience, it
is very effective to reduce the cognitive
load on your user.
Some best practices.
Recognition rather than recall
Chunking helps content processing
It's easier for users to recall the
first and last items of a list.
Limit the number of options
But don’t simplify too much
As already mentioned in the chapter on usability,
recognition trumps recall.
Recognizing data is often easier than recalling
data without sequence or context.
Users spend most of their time on other sites.
This means that users prefer your site to
work in the same way as any other site they
already know.
Words, images, icons, and functionality have
context in both your application
and any other experience.
Users assume that "Cancel" means that an application
stops an operation.
They expect a back arrow to return to a previous
screen.
They expect a website's checkout to work like
any other checkout.
They recognize it instead of remembering it.
The mental effort required to complete a task
is called the cognitive load.
You can think of it as the processing power
that the user needs to interact with a product.
If the information to be processed exceeds
the user's ability to cope with it
the cognitive load is too high.
There is a limit to the number of items an
average person can keep in their working memory.
In 1956, George Miller claimed that the scope
of working memory is limited to about 7 pieces
of information.
Also known as Miller's Law.
The magic number seven
has been debunked by research.
The idea that you can only store a limited
number of items in your short-term memory
however still stands.
A better way is to organize content into smaller
chunks so that users can easily process, understand,
and remember them.
These chunks bypass the limited working memory
capacity and ensure that the working memory
can work more efficiently.
So how many items a person can easily remember
depends on how the list is "broken".
Psychology professor Nelson Cowan researched
that people are able to remember 3 to 5 parts
of short-term memory tasks.
So it's no coincidence that US phone numbers
look like this.
Instead of having to remember 10 individual
digits, a phone number has three parts, with
four or fewer entries in each part.
This makes it easier to remember.
If you know the area code by heart, then you
don't even have to remember that part of the number.
You see the same principle with
credit card numbers.
Users tend to remember the first and last
items in a sequence best.
Also called the serial position effect.
A term coined by Herman Ebbinghaus describes
how an item's position in a sequence affects
recall accuracy.
By positioning the most important actions
on the far left and right within elements
such as navigation, memory can be increased.
Or to place the valuable items at the beginning
or end of a list.
More options are therefore not only more difficult
to remember.
They also lead to more difficult decisions.
Hick's law predicts that the time and effort
it takes to make a decision increases with
the number of options.
The more choices, the more time users need
to make their decisions.
Choosing carefully from three things is easy.
Choosing carefully from 30 things is impossible.
Having too many options can lead to a
choice paradox.
So minimizing the number of choices is the
first step.
If not possible, break complex tasks into
smaller steps to reduce the cognitive load.
But don’t simplify too much.
The best method of reducing complexity is
to avoid it in the first place.
Analyze each element and remove as many as
possible without compromising the overall function.
But keep in mind that if you simplify too
much, you transfer some complexity to the users.
Also known as Tesler's law.
It states that for any system there is a degree
of complexity that cannot be reduced.
All processes have a core of complexity that
cannot be designed away and therefore must
be assumed by the system or the user.
Ensure that users are relieved as much as
possible by dealing with inherent complexity
during design and development.
Memory goes hand in hand with attention.
Which brings us to the next topic.
Our working memory plays a major role in what
we can process.
First, we must pay attention to be able
to perceive that information.
We can distinguish four types of attention.
Selective attention
Divided attention
Focused attention
Sustained Attention
Selective attention is an automatic process
that chooses between important and less important
stimuli depending on the situation.
Since we can only devote ourselves to one
thing at a time, this kind of process helps
to select the most important stimuli in the
given situation.
If a process is automated, several processes
can take place simultaneously.
This is divided attention.
A great example of every day is driving and
talking at the same time.
We can only pay attention to one action at
a time, so the driver stops talking and focuses
on driving if something happens on the road
in front of the driver.
At this point, attention becomes focused,
meaning attention is limited to one object,
action, or stimuli.
Focused attention is the brain's ability to
focus its attention on a target stimulus for
a period of time.
Sustained attention is when we keep our attention
on one subject for a long time, even if we
have to repeat the given action or activity.
This is what we think of when we talk about
focus and concentration. Deep attention that
allows you to absorb and process information
or perform a task that takes longer.
Now that you know the different types of attention,
how can you use them?
Let's look at some key tactics you can use
to design better for your users' attention.
Movement. This is the highest part of your visual system.
So when something moves,
your attention is drawn to it.
But when everything is in motion, the stationary
item gets the attention.
Sound.
Audible alerts can be one of the most annoying
things on the web, but it does grab your attention.
When used more elegantly, it can work well.
Progress and interruptions.
If something doesn't match what we expect,
we notice.
Big texts.
This usually indicates the main information
in the design, so our eyes tend to go there first.
Contrast and color.
This allows parts of your design to jump out
of your peripheral vision.
Users will notice those parts without looking
directly at them.
In our lesson on visual design,
I’ll tell you more about this.
The next topic is about decision making.
How people make a decision
depends a lot on the choices they have.
Comparisons.
Users choose things based on comparing their
options.
That's why you need to make comparisons that
make your preferred options look better.
The Von Restorff effect, also known as the
isolation effect, predicts that when several
similar objects are present,
the one that differs from the rest
is most likely to be remembered.
For example, you can indicate which option
is the "best value" or the "most popular".
Or the central stage effect: People tend to
choose the middle option in a series of items.
Another popular method is the decoy effect,
by creating a new option that is easy to ignore.
Take a look at these options and prices.
Which one do you prefer?
And which one do you prefer now?
When choosing between two alternatives, the
addition of a third, less attractive option
the decoy, can influence our perception of
the original two choices.
Most people will only consider the choices
presented to them, even if there are other options.
Whether you're designing shipping options,
subscription features, or survey questions,
this matters.
Each choice should bring the user closer to
their goal, and you can design the choices
to be right for your goals in the process.
Motivations are one of the most powerful
psychological elements in UX.
Motivations are built-in needs.
Things we want.
Some are physical, you need them to survive,
and some only exist in your mind.
Motivations are relative.
That means it's not about how much you get,
it's about how much more you get compared
to what you have or what other people have.
Motivation increases as users get closer to
their goal.
The shorter the distance to the goal, the
more motivated people are to reach it.
People are even more motivated when the end
is in sight.
We call this the goal-gradient effect.
Interestingly, even artificial or estimated
progress indicators can help motivate users.
That's why it's critical that your experience
provides a clear indication of progress to
provide this feedback to your users.
One of the best examples to illustrate this
is a loyalty card.
Let's say you get a frequent-buyer card at
your local coffee shop.
Every time you buy a cup of coffee, you get
a stamp on your card.
When the card is full, you get a free cup
of coffee.
Here are two different scenarios:
Card A has 10 spaces for the stamps, and when
you get the card, all spaces are empty.
Card B card has 12 spaces for the stamps.
When you get the card, the first two spaces
are already stamped.
The question is which card is filled first,
A or B?
After all, in both scenarios, you have to
buy 10 cups of coffee to get the free coffee.
Does it matter which card you use?
The answer is apparently yes.
You fill the card faster with card B than
you do with card A. And the reason is called
the goal gradient effect.
The goal gradient effect was first studied
in 1934 by Clark Hull with rats.
He found that rats that ran a maze to get
food at the end would run faster as they got
to the end of the maze.
The goal-gradient effect says that you will
speed up your behavior the closer you get
to your goal.
The coffee reward card scenarios I describe
above were part of a study by Ran Kivetz to
see if humans would act as the rats did in
the original 1934 study.
And the answer is yes, they do.
The last topic I want to discuss in this lesson
is persuasion.
Motivation is distinguished from persuasion
in that it includes force, stimulus, or influence
to bring about change.
Forcing users to do things is usually a
bad idea.
People don't like to be forced.
Instead, we need to convince them to take
action.
UX designers can use the principles of persuasion
to design more effective user experiences.
People feel the need to give something back
when they receive something.
To return a favor.
Reciprocity is a social norm for responding
to one positive action with another positive actions
rewarding kind actions.
In the context of digital product experiences,
users are more likely to engage with your
product if you provide them with value first.
They are more likely to trust and answer you.
That's even more important when you're about
to request something big from your users,
like signup or payment.
For example, many websites offer free downloads
of white papers but require users to provide
some personal information such as their email address,
before granting access to the download.
Studies have shown that you can often get
a larger amount of valid user data by asking
after a download rather than before.
People often use other people's actions as
the basis for their own actions.
Users adjust their behavior based on what
others are doing.
Social proof is a handy shortcut that users
take to determine how to behave.
When they are unsure or when the situation
is ambiguous, they are likely to view and
accept the actions of others as correct.
The greater the number of people, the more
appropriate the action seems.
Also known as the bandwagon effect.
Customer reviews and testimonials are one
of the most popular ways to exploit this aspect
of persuasion.
People tend to rely on and obey
those in authority.
For example: To help sell products, tell your
potential customers about expert reviews,
awards, and accreditations.
To sell your people, you need to focus on
their qualifications, experience, and achievements.
People are more likely to want something if
the supply is limited.
While scarcity is commonly invoked to encourage
buying behavior, it can also be used to increase
quality by encouraging people to be more judicious
with the actions they take.
It can come in several forms: Limited-time,
Limited number, and Limited access.
Never fake scarcity if you don't want reactance!
Example: Make sure to emphasize limited supplies
or limited-time offers.
With this we have come to the end of this
lesson and you should have a slightly better
picture of how the human brain works.
What have we learned in this lesson?
To design for people, you also need to understand
people.
The way people acquire, process, and store
information in their brains is what
cognitive psychology focuses on.
We started with memory.
And that there is only a limited amount of
information that people can store in their
working memory.
So, if you want to optimize the user experience,
it is very effective to reduce
the cognitive load on your user.
For example, by
Recognition rather than recall
Chunking helps content processing
It's easier for users to recall the first
and last items of a list
Limit the number of options.
But don’t simply too much.
Memory goes hand in hand with attention.
The second topic we discussed.
There are four types of attention:
Selective attention
Divided attention
Focused attention
Sustained attention
The third topic was about decision making.
I showed you that how people make a decision
depends a lot on the choices they have.
We discussed motivations, one of the most
powerful psychological elements.
The shorter the distance to the goal, the
more motivated people are to reach it.
We call this the goal-gradient effect.
The last topic was persuasion.
Motivation is distinguished from persuasion
in that it includes force, stimulus, or influence
to bring about change.
Some examples of persuasion are
Reciprocity
Social proof
Authority
Scarcity
In the next lesson, I'll tell you more about
one of the most fundamental components of UX
Information Architecture.